## Circadian Clocks

What keeps you on schedule despite your late-night studies or attempts to get up early, are "tiny clocks in your cells" [EvoNews2012]. Dynamical behaviors such as oscillations dominate cell biology as cells need to exquisitely coordinate this temporal and spatial variation to survive [Rue2013]. As a result of the earth's rotation on its axis, most organisms live in environments that oscillate with a period of approximately 24 hours. The circadian clock is an intrinsic and entrainable timekeeping mechanism that has evolved in organisms, allowing them to adapt to periodic environmental fluctuations such as light and temperature [Roenneberg2002].

__Three main characteristics__ define rhythms of behavior as a circadian process, distinct from oscillations that are driven by environmental or specific metabolic cycles:

1. circadian rhythms __persist under constant environmental conditions__,
2. circadian systems must be __sensitive to an environmental stimulus__ to achieve __entrainment__ with the sidereal day,
3. circadian timing mechanism __maintain its intrinsic periodicity__ at different constant temperatures within the organism’s physiological range, a feature known as __temperature compensation__.

Circadian systems are entrained rather than driven by zeitgebers. Unlike driven synchronization, entrainment results in a specific phase relationship to the zeitgeber cycle, which depends on the system’s endogenous period and its phase response curve as well as on the amplitude of both the zeitgeber and the endogenous oscillator. Entrainable systems are taken to be advantageous over purely driven ones by providing the possibility of anticipation, that is, preparing physiology before the external changes occur (sunrise, drop in temperature, food availability, etc.) [Roenneberg2002].

### Evolution of circadian clocks

One of the most common arguments that a clock must be adaptive was its ubiquity [ClockEvo2005], which suggests that these endogenous circadian programs enhance reproductive fitness [Ouyang1998] by improving their ability to adapt to extrinsic influences, specifically daily changes in environmental factors such as light, temperature, and humidity [Woelfe2004]. Circadian clocks provide fitness advantage even to organisms living under constant conditions, such as those prevailing in the depth of oceans or in subterranean caves, perhaps by coordinating several metabolic processes in the internal milieu [Sharma2005].

One key goal in chronobiology is to identify the primary selective pressure, which demands the existing circadian oscillatory system. Although circadian clocks are believed to have arisen as a result of adaptive evolution under periodic environments, there has been hardly any rigorous and conclusive empirical study to support this. While the proximate as well as ultimate driving forces for the evolution of circadian clocks remain largely unknown, much has been speculated as to when biological clocks might have first appeared and about what could have been the initial selection pressures that might have acted on early biological clocks [Sharma2005]. Entrainability and regularity are thought to be the primary selective pressures through evolution of the clock [Zyga2014].

It was believed that circadian clocks were a feature of eukaryotic organization, and that 24-h clocks would be of no advantage to prokaryotes, whose numbers double every few hours. It was also believed that cellular organization of prokaryotes was too simple to accommodate complex mechanisms that are required to regulate circadian rhythms. However, it is no more a hypothesis but a fact that even primitive unicellular organisms such as cyanobacteria house functional circadian clock machinery. This finding, thus pushed back the origin of circadian clocks by several hundred million years, and it is now believed that circadian clocks may have appeared on earth along with primitive life forms. It is also possible that several features of circadian clocks have evolved in different organisms independently of each other and any similarity between them could be a result of convergent evolution. Several hypotheses have been put forward to explain the appearance of circadian clocks on this planet:

- __Pittendrigh’s "escape-from-light hypothesis"__: circadian rhythms had evolved under selection pressure presented by environmental LD cycles, wherein photophobic processes were confined to darkness and photophilic processes to light. Thus, circadian rhythms evolved to protect organisms from deleterious photo-oxidative effects of the environment by helping them reschedule light-sensitive reactions during the night [Sharma2005].
- __Pittendrigh and Bruce’s "circadian resonance hypothesis"__: The ubiquitous presence of circadian clocks in a wide variety of phenomena and organisms suggests that they confer adaptive advantage to their owners, perhaps by enabling the organisms to synchronize to LD cycles, and thereby to maintain appropriate phase relationships between their external and internal cycles. Based on this logic, it was speculated that at the advent of early life forms on this planet several temporal patterns were present in living organisms, but only those, which matched environmental periodicity managed to survive. states that organisms with clocks having periodicities matching those of cyclic environment perform "better" compared to those whose periodicities do not match the period of the environmental cycles [Sharma2005].

Several exciting research findings along these lines of thought have been reported recently. First, in 1998, the "resonance hypothesis" was tested in cyanobacteria by Carl Johnson's group at Vanderbilt University. The notion that intrinsic ("freerunning") period of the circadian clock needs to be similar to the period of the entraining cycle (24 hours in nature) was tested in period mutants of Synechococcus sp [Ouyang1998]. Various mutants were exposed to different lengths of the light cycle. Two mutants were tested at the time in competitive assay protocols. In every case, the strain with intrinsic period more closely matching the entraining period won the competitive assay. Thus, being in sync with the environment confers fitness against conspecific competitors [ClockEvo2005].

There is presently no clear answer why biological oscillators that persist in constant conditions (a condition that is rare in nature–restricted to caves or to polar regions in summer or winter) were selected over hourglass timers to be the biological timekeepers for organisms in natural light/dark (LD) cycles. Roenneberg and Merrow have stated, “Evolution has shaped circadian clocks in a cyclic world; temporal constancy of environmental qualities must have been an extremely rare exception. It is therefore the mechanism of entrainment that has evolved and not sustained rhythmicity in constant conditions. The latter is theoretically not even essential for a functional entrained circadian system” [Ma2016].  

## Cyanobacteria

Cyanobacteria represent one of the most widespread phyla of bacteria living in habitats ranging from marine systems over Antarctic rocks to deserts. They are the only prokaryotes capable of performing oxygenic photosynthesis, using H2O as the electron donor. Oxygenic photosynthesis is otherwise only known in eukaryotes such as algae and plants. Thus they are thought to play an essential role in the evolution of green algae and plants. An endosymbiotic event, by which an ancient eukaryote engulfed a cyanobacteria, represents the origin of the chloroplast. This theory is supported by molecular phylogenetic analyses as well as unique similarities between cyanobacterial and plant photosynthesis.

Nowadays cyanobacteria show a high diversity in respect to their genomes, morphology and physiology. Fossil records report that cyanobacteria already lived on earth 2 billion years ago and had a key role in the appearance of oxygen in Earth’s atmosphere. Besides the substantial amount of oxygen produced by cyanobacteria, they contribute to primary production by converting atmospheric and aqueous carbon into organic compounds. In addition cyanobacteria supply great amounts of nitrogen from the atmosphere to the nitrogen cycle and are source of many secondary metabolites. These features caused cyanobacteria to become valuable targets for biotechnological productions.

## Circadian Clocks in Cyanobacteria
Circadian (daily) rhythms are a fundamental and ubiquitous property of eukaryotic organisms. However, cyanobacteria are the only prokaryotic group for which _bona fide_ circadian properties have been persuasively documented, even though homologs of the cyanobacterial kaiABC central clock genes are distributed widely among Eubacteria and Archaea [Schmelling2016]. Circadian (daily) rhythms are a fundamental property of cellular and organismal organization that regulate gene expression, metabolic activity, sleep, behavior, and many other biological processes to provide a fitness advantage [Ma2016].
Beginning about 25 years ago, however, this dogma was overturned as research on prokaryotic cyanobacteria persuasively demonstrated that nitrogen fixation and gene expression exhibited _bona fide_ circadian characteristics. Once the floodgates of “eukaryotic-centric thinking” were opened, a torrent of information about circadian timekeeping in cyanobacteria was released, including that gene expression and chromosomal topology is globally regulated in addition to circadian rhythms of nitrogen fixation, metabolism, and cell division. Moreover, cyanobacteria have become the model system that most persuasively illustrates the adaptive value of circadian organization in 24-h rhythmic environments [Ma2016].

### Further Reading

Ditty, J.L. and Williams, S.B. and Golden, Susan S. A Cyanobacterial Circadian Timing Mechanism. 2003. [Annual Review of Genetics. 37(1), 513-543](http://www.annualreviews.org/doi/abs/10.1146/annurev.genet.37.110801.142716)

Ouyang, Yan and Andersson, Carol R. and Kondo, Takao and Golden, Susan S. and Johnson, Carl Hirschie. Resonating circadian clocks enhance fitness in cyanobacteria. 1998. [PNAS. 95, 8660-8664](http://www.pnas.org/content/95/15/8660.full.pdf)

Woelfle, Mark A. and Ouyang, Yan and Phanvijhitsiri, Kittiporn and Johnson, Carl Hirsche. The Adaptive Value of Circadian Clocks: An Experimental Assessment in Cyanobacteria. 2004. Current Biology. 14, 1481-1486

Roenneberg, Till and Merrow Martha. Life before the Clock: Modeling Circadian Evolution. 2002. [Journal of Biological Rhythms. 17(6), 495-505](http://jbr.sagepub.com/content/17/6/495.abstract)     

Zyga, Lisa. How did evolution optimize circadian clocks?. 2014. [Phys.org](http://phys.org/news/2014-09-evolution-optimize-circadian-clocks.html)    

Rué, Pau and Garcia-Ojalvo, Jordi. Modeling Gene Expression in Time and Space. 2013. [Annual Review of Biophysics. 42, 605-627](http://www.annualreviews.org/doi/abs/10.1146/annurev-biophys-083012-130335)

Circadian Rhythms: "Nature's Intricate Clockwork". 2012. [Evolution News and Views](http://www.evolutionnews.org/2012/09/circadian_rhyth063881.html)    

Paranjpe, Dhanashree A. and Sharma, Vijay Kumar. Evolution of temporal order in living organisms. 2005. [Journal of Circadian Rhythms. 3(7)](http://www.jcircadianrhythms.com/articles/10.1186/1740-3391-3-7/)    

Zivkovic, Bora. Clock Evolution. 2012. [Scientific American](http://blogs.scientificamerican.com/a-blog-around-the-clock/clock-evolution/)    

Ma, Peijun and Mori, Tetsuya and Zhao, Chi and Thiel, Teresa and Johnson, Carl Hirschie. Evolution of KaiC-Dependent Timekeepers: A Proto-circadian Timing Mechanism Confers Adaptive Fitness in the Purple Bacterium _Rhodopseudomonas palustris_. 2016. [PLOS Genetics. 12(3)](http://journals.plos.org/plosgenetics/article?id=10.1371/journal.pgen.1005922) 
