ROADMAP.md, before:

## Roadmap

### Research Questions

- How does the genome reshape under oscillating conditions?
- What are strategies to cope with two alternating, oscillating resources?
- What, if any, is the fitness advantage in competition to no-clock organisms?
- What, if any, is the fitness advantage in competition to different cycling organisms?
- What are the boundary conditions that allow for the evolution of circadian clocks? Mutation rate, oscillation (length compared to organisms live cycle, length differences between phases, 12h/12h vs. 16h/8h etc.), reward differences, resources limitation...
- Can the evolved clock adapt to new cyclic environments? No mutations allowed, put clock organisms into new phase world.

### Goals

1. Replicate [Beckmann et al., 2007]() and add second alternating resource cycle.
2. Create a pool of organisms with circadian clocks (adapted to different cycles).
3. Examine fitness in competition experiments with no-clock organisms and other clock organisms.
4. Find boundary condition taht allow for the evolution of circadian clocks (Mutation rate, different reward for resources)

### Timeline

#### September

- [x] Create Repo, Readme, Code of Conduct, License, Contribution Guidelines and Roadmap
- [x] Create Wiki and add information about the project
- [x] Attend Kick-Off meeting in Berlin [9-11.September]

#### October

- [ ] Get Avida running and get familiar with all options and setting
- [ ] Start replicating  [Beckmann et al., 2007]()

#### November

- [ ] Add circadian conditions to the existing scripts

#### December

#### January

- [ ] Work at MSU

#### February

- [ ] Work at MSU
- [ ] Attent final meeting in Berlin

Commit message:

added exprimental design to ROADMAP

ROADMAP.md, after:

## Experimental Design
![alt text](images/ExperimentalDesign.png "Experimental Design")

### Research Questions

- How does the genome reshape under oscillating conditions?
- What are strategies to cope with two alternating, oscillating resources?
- What, if any, is the fitness advantage in competition to no-clock organisms?
- What, if any, is the fitness advantage in competition to different cycling organisms?
- What are the boundary conditions that allow for the evolution of circadian clocks? Mutation rate, oscillation (length compared to organisms live cycle, length differences between phases, 12h/12h vs. 16h/8h etc.), reward differences, resources limitation...
- Can the evolved clock adapt to new cyclic environments? No mutations allowed, put clock organisms into new phase world.

## Roadmap
### Goals

1. Replicate [Beckmann et al., 2007](http://www.ofria.com/pubs/2007bBeckmannEtAl.pdf) and add second alternating resource cycle.
2. Create a pool of organisms with circadian clocks.
3. Find boundary conditions that allow for the evolution of circadian clocks, i.e. mutation rate, different reward for resources, "day lenght"
4. Adapt clock organism pool to different cyclic environments.
5. Examine fitness in competition experiments with no-clock organisms and other clock organisms.

### Timeline
#### September

- [x] Create Repo, Readme, Code of Conduct, License, Contribution Guidelines and Roadmap
- [x] Create Wiki and add information about the project
- [x] Attend Kick-Off meeting in Berlin [9-11.September]

#### October

- [x] Get Avida running and get familiar with all options and settings
- [x] Start replicating [Beckmann et al., 2007](http://www.ofria.com/pubs/2007bBeckmannEtAl.pdf)
- [x] Book flights to Chicago and find place to stay at MSU

#### November

- [ ] Write midway report
- [ ] Finish replicating [Beckmann et al., 2007](http://www.ofria.com/pubs/2007bBeckmannEtAl.pdf)
- [ ]

#### December

- [ ] Add circadian conditions to the existing scripts
- [ ]
- [ ]

#### January

- [ ]
- [ ]
- [ ]

#### February

- [ ]
- [ ]
- [ ]

#### March

- [ ] Attent final meeting in Berlin
- [ ] Write final report
