open_notebook/2016-10-14-open-science-statement.md, before:

## The Fellow Program

This project is part of an [open science fellow program](https://www.wikimedia.de/wiki/Fellowprogramm) funded by [Wikimedia](https://wikimediafoundation.org/wiki/Home) and [Stifterverband](stifterverband bonn). Within the fellow program is mentored by an open science expert, which is in my case [Daniel Mietchen (@EvoMRI)](https://twitter.com/evomri?lang=de). More information about the fellow program can be found in the [Wikimedia blog](wikipedia tipos de blogs) (only in german).

This week I had my first Skype meeting with Daniel to discuss some general reporting procedures and first progresses on the project.

We agreed on some standard procedures:

* Weekly reports including progress and outlook for the next as an issue in the GitHub repo (more information [here](https://github.com/schmelling/clock_evo/tree/master/open_notebook))
* If needed we'll have a skype meeting on fridays
* Monthly updates to the final report, which is due to end of Feb 2016

## Open Science Statement

We had to write an Open Science Statement for the Wikimedia website, which was due to this friday. This actually caused some problems and confusions on my side. The more I thought about the program and my project the more I had the feeling that program was intended to create something universally useful to open science and that my project, eventhough openly created, would miss the point. This actually provoke me to rethink my project. The discussion with Daniel help here a lot to clear up this misunderstanding.

Goals of the fellow program:
* open up scientific research.
* fellows should work on their projects as usual, however:
  * they should try to open up as much of their work as possible
  * discuss points where they cannot do it for whatever reasons.
* This should lead to a better understanding of what is needed in order to establish open science and an open workflow in scientific research.

The discussion helped my a lot to formulate my statement, but we also agreed that the formulation was a little bit misleading.

```My Open Science statement```

Since this is the pilot run of the fellowship one would expect some imperfections, which is prefectly fine. Daniel and I thought that some kind of forum where we could discuss such misunderstandings would be useful.

Some ideas:
* a GitHub repo where you issue problems and create documents
* [Phabricator](https://phabricator.wikimedia.org) as it is used for Wikimedia projects
* we already have a Google group that could also be used, which is, however, not open to a broader audience

## Open Science Side projects

Thinking about the Open Science Statement lead to some new side projects that would have some universally use for the community.

### Guide for starting a research project on GitHub

The fellowship allowed me to start a new project on the evolution of circadian clocks using digital organisms. I'll use GitHub for most of my work as an interaction platform, for version control, and as a storage of code and data. This lead to the questions of how to start a scientific project on GitHub and what is needed for others to interact with the project. The lessons learned from starting and maintaining a GitHub repo will be summarized in a guide for others that want to use GitHub for their projects. The [Mozilla Science Lab](https://github.com/mozillascience/working-open-workshop) already provides some useful tips, which also helped me in the beginning. The guide can be found [here](https://github.com/schmelling/how_to_science_repo)

### Python Reference List

I will analyze and visualize the data produced in the project using Python and this got me thinking about other people that want to contribute to the project but do not know much about Python. Therefore I will try to create a reference list for Python. This will at first be a [GitHub repo]() where I sort links to books, videos, online tutorials and more, in categories. This repo will thus manly contain various markdown files.

-- Cheers, Nic

Commit message:

added Open Science Staement to lab notebook entry

open_notebook/2016-10-14-open-science-statement.md, after:

## The Fellow Program

This project is part of an [open science fellow program](https://www.wikimedia.de/wiki/Fellowprogramm) funded by [Wikimedia](https://wikimediafoundation.org/wiki/Home) and [Stifterverband](stifterverband bonn). Within the fellow program is mentored by an open science expert, which is in my case [Daniel Mietchen (@EvoMRI)](https://twitter.com/evomri?lang=de). More information about the fellow program can be found in the [Wikimedia blog](wikipedia tipos de blogs) (only in german).

This week I had my first Skype meeting with Daniel to discuss some general reporting procedures and first progresses on the project.

We agreed on some standard procedures:

* Weekly reports including progress and outlook for the next as an issue in the GitHub repo (more information [here](https://github.com/schmelling/clock_evo/tree/master/open_notebook))
* If needed we'll have a skype meeting on fridays
* Monthly updates to the final report, which is due to end of Feb 2016

## Open Science Statement

We had to write an Open Science Statement for the Wikimedia website, which was due to this friday. This actually caused some problems and confusions on my side. The more I thought about the program and my project the more I had the feeling that program was intended to create something universally useful to open science and that my project, eventhough openly created, would miss the point. This actually provoke me to rethink my project. The discussion with Daniel help here a lot to clear up this misunderstanding.

Goals of the fellow program:
* open up scientific research.
* fellows should work on their projects as usual, however:
  * they should try to open up as much of their work as possible
  * discuss points where they cannot do it for whatever reasons.
* This should lead to a better understanding of what is needed in order to establish open science and an open workflow in scientific research.

The discussion helped my a lot to formulate my statement, but we also agreed that the formulation was a little bit misleading.

```During my project I will work on the evolution of circadian clocks using digital organisms. In the process the code and the data will be available under an open license on GitHub. Furthermore I will write about my progress, problems, and thoughts in an open lab notebook.```

Since this is the pilot run of the fellowship one would expect some imperfections, which is prefectly fine. Daniel and I thought that some kind of forum where we could discuss such misunderstandings would be useful.

Some ideas:
* a GitHub repo where you issue problems and create documents
* [Phabricator](https://phabricator.wikimedia.org) as it is used for Wikimedia projects
* we already have a Google group that could also be used, which is, however, not open to a broader audience

## Open Science Side projects

Thinking about the Open Science Statement lead to some new side projects that would have some universally use for the community.

### Guide for starting a research project on GitHub

The fellowship allowed me to start a new project on the evolution of circadian clocks using digital organisms. I'll use GitHub for most of my work as an interaction platform, for version control, and as a storage of code and data. This lead to the questions of how to start a scientific project on GitHub and what is needed for others to interact with the project. The lessons learned from starting and maintaining a GitHub repo will be summarized in a guide for others that want to use GitHub for their projects. The [Mozilla Science Lab](https://github.com/mozillascience/working-open-workshop) already provides some useful tips, which also helped me in the beginning. The guide can be found [here](https://github.com/schmelling/how_to_science_repo)

### Python Reference List

I will analyze and visualize the data produced in the project using Python and this got me thinking about other people that want to contribute to the project but do not know much about Python. Therefore I will try to create a reference list for Python. This will at first be a [GitHub repo]() where I sort links to books, videos, online tutorials and more, in categories. This repo will thus manly contain various markdown files.

-- Cheers, Nic
